## 10. Nanoscale Force Measurement Techniques -- Optical Tweezers {#nanoscale-force-measurement-techniques-optical-tweezers .H2}

### ![Diagram, shape Description automatically generated](media/image104.png){width="1.3791666666666667in" height="1.5673611111111112in"}Optical Tweezers {#diagram-shape-description-automatically-generatedoptical-tweezers .H3}

Optical tweezers provide a way of manipulating atoms and molecules, as
well as nano or micron scale objects. They can also be used to measure
very small forces.

These instruments work by trapping small particles in a focussed laser
beam. Once trapped, particles can be manipulated by simply steering the
laser around.

### ![A picture containing polygon Description automatically generated](media/image105.png){width="2.3465277777777778in" height="2.276388888888889in"}The wave nature of light {#a-picture-containing-polygon-description-automatically-generatedthe-wave-nature-of-light .H3}

Light is an electromagnetic wave. As it propagates through vacuum or a
medium it carries energy. The energy is stored in electric and magnetic
fields that oscillate in a direction perpendicular to the direction of
travel of the waves (more on this in your 'Classical Fields' module).

As the light travels along, the Electric field at a given time, t, and
point, x, in space will vary according to the equation

$$E = E_{0}\sin(\omega t - kx)$$

where *E~o~* is the amplitude of the wave, *ω* is its angular frequency
and *k* is called the wavenumber (*=2π/λ*, where *λ*  is the wavelength
of the light).

### Intensity {#intensity .H3}

The time averaged intensity of light, *I*, can be related to the
magnitude of the electric field, *E*, by the relationship

$$\left\langle I \right\rangle = \frac{c\varepsilon\varepsilon_{0}n}{2}\left\langle E^{2} \right\rangle$$

> in Wm^-2^

Where *c* is the speed of light (ms^-1^) and *n* is the refractive index
of the medium in which it propagates. All other constants have their
usual definitions.

Note: For a sinusoidal oscillating field, the time average value of
*\<E^2^\>* is not zero. So the intensity is not zero! In fact, it is
equal to *½ E~0~^2^*. The proof of this is left as an exercise for the
reader.

**The key point here is that intensity is proportional to the electric
field squared**

### ![Shape Description automatically generated](media/image106.png){width="1.2833333333333334in" height="2.7645833333333334in"}Optical trapping of particles {#shape-description-automatically-generatedoptical-trapping-of-particles .H3}

Small dielectric (insulating) particles experience a force when
illuminated with visible light. If a dielectric particle is placed in an
intensity gradient a force is exerted on the particle such that it will
move to a region of higher intensity.

To understand the origin of this effect we must consider the interaction
between the dielectric particles and the incident laser light radiation.

When a particle is placed in a laser beam, the electric field associated
with the incident light will cause a slight separation of charges in the
particle material and thus induce a dipole moment on the particle. This
dipole moment will then interact with the field which caused it to form.

So in one dimension the force on a dielectric particle is

$$\mathbf{F} = - \frac{dU}{dx}\mathbf{i =}\frac{2\alpha}{c\varepsilon\varepsilon_{0}n}\frac{dI}{dx}\mathbf{i}$$

Generalising this to three dimensions we obtain

$\mathbf{F} = - \frac{dU}{dx}\mathbf{i} - \frac{dU}{dy}\mathbf{j} - \frac{dU}{dz}\mathbf{k =}\frac{2\alpha}{c\varepsilon\varepsilon_{0}n}\left( \frac{dI}{dx}\mathbf{i +}\frac{dI}{dy}\mathbf{j +}\frac{dI}{dz}\mathbf{k} \right)$

So the **force always acts along the direction of increasing intensity
gradient. Particles will therefore tend to move to regions of higher
intensity.**

### ![Shape Description automatically generated with medium confidence](media/image107.png){width="2.4902777777777776in" height="3.557638888888889in"}Making a simple optical trap {#shape-description-automatically-generated-with-medium-confidencemaking-a-simple-optical-trap .H3}

We saw in the last section that dielectric particles will tend to move
to regions of higher intensity in a laser beam. How can we use this to
create a simple optical trap?

The answer to this question is extremely simple. If we consider the
**intensity profile inside a laser beam, we find that it is not uniform
across the beam, but instead it has a Gaussian shape** as we move from
the centre of the beam to the edges.

$$I = I_{0}\exp\left( - \frac{\left( x^{2} + y^{2} \right)}{2w_{0}^{2}} \right) = I_{0}\exp\left( - \frac{r^{2}}{2w_{0}^{2}} \right)$$

where *I~o~* is the intensity at the centre of the beam, *w~o\ ~*is a
measure of the beam width and r is the distance from the centre of the
beam.

![Chart, funnel chart Description automatically
generated](media/image108.png){width="1.6222222222222222in"
height="2.2430555555555554in"}**This Gaussian profile means that an
intensity gradient already exists within the laser beam and small
dielectric particles will tend to be attracted and trapped in the centre
of the beam.**

However, the problem of trapping along the axis of the laser beam (z
direction) still needs to be considered as no intensity gradient exists
for a coherent parallel beam. This difficulty can be overcome by
focussing the laser beam using a simple microscope objective lens.

When the light is focused, it creates a trap along the axis of the beam.
This is because the area of the beam decreases as it approaches the
focal plane and then increaeses after passing through it. This causes
the intensity to steadily increase and then decrease on passing through
the focal point of the lens.

The strength of the trap in the z direction can be varied by changing
the angle, θ, (see diagram on left). The larger this angle, the steeper
the intensity gradient will be along the axis of the laser beam. The
maximum gradient in intensity can be obtained by using a lens with a
high numerical aperture (NA), where NA is defined as

$$NA = n\sin\theta$$

where n is the refractive index of the ambient environment.

**Trap stiffness (Quadratic approximation to beam profile)**

![quadraticapproxtogaussian](media/image109.jpeg){width="3.7680555555555557in"
height="2.8229166666666665in"}For small displacements from the central
position we can approximate the Gaussian intensity profile of the beam
using a quadratic function

Laser Intensity

$$I = I_{0}\exp\left( - \frac{r^{2}}{2w_{0}^{2}} \right) \approx I_{0}\left( 1 - \frac{r^{2}}{2w_{0}^{2}} \right)$$

Intensity gradient

$$\frac{dI}{dr} = I_{0}\left( - \frac{r}{w_{0}^{2}} \right)$$

As we will see in the following examples, this allows us to determine
the effective spring constant (or stiffness) of the trap and to use
optical tweezers to measure forces that are exerted on trapped
particles.

For small displacements (*r\<\<w~o~*) the intensity profile can be
approximated by a quadratic form. This results in a force which is
directly proportional to the displacement of the particle within the
trap.

$F = - kr$

Where

$$k = \ \frac{2\alpha I_{0}}{c\varepsilon\varepsilon_{0}nw_{0}^{2}}$$

Hence, if we know the displacement and the trap stiffness, we can
calculate the force exerted on our trapped particle.

### Detection of particle movement {#detection-of-particle-movement .H3}

The split photodiode arrangement used in AFM can also be used to detect
deflections in optical traps. However, a quadrant photodiode is used to
detect deflections in both the x and y directions.

In the case of large particles, a shadow is cast on the quadrant
photodiode. This means that measured intensity varies as the particle
moves in the x-y plane.

For smaller particles, light scattered from the particle interferes with
light in the main beam to produce a fringe pattern on the photodiodes.
As the particle moves around, the fringe patterns move. This can also be
used to detect motion of the particle.

Quadrant photodiode

(4 photodiodes)

Shadowing (large particles)

Fringe pattern (small particles)

Laser beam

### Calibration of optical traps {#calibration-of-optical-traps .H3}

![](media/image114.png){width="2.217361111111111in"
height="1.2798611111111111in"}There are 2 main techniques used to
calibrate the spring constant or 'stiffness' of optical traps.

**Method 1)** We can measure the displacement of a particle under the
influence of known forces

$$k = \frac{F_{applied}}{x}$$

**Method 2)** We can measure the mean square displacement, \<x^2^\>, of
a trapped particle under the influence of thermal motion

$$k \approx \frac{k_{B}T}{\left\langle x^{2} \right\rangle}$$

### ![opticaltrappingDNA](media/image115.jpeg){width="2.8229166666666665in" height="3.4881944444444444in"}Force Measurements {#opticaltrappingdnaforce-measurements .H3}

It is possible to perform force measurements on e.g. single molecules.

An optical trap and a fine micropipette can be used to measure the
forces exerted by individual DNA molecules.

Small polymer beads can be tethered to the ends of the molecule and used
to manipulate it.

C. Bustamante et al., **Nature**, 421(23), 423 (2003)

### Summary of key concepts {#summary-of-key-concepts-2 .H3}

Atomic force microscopes can be used to measure forces,

$$F = kz$$

The spring constant of an AFM cantilever is determined by its material
properties and its physical dimensions

> $$k = \frac{3EI}{l^{3}}$$

A split photodiode arrangement is used to detect deflections and to
measure forces with \>10pN precision

Particles in a laser beam will experience a force that acts to pull them
to regions of higher intensity

$$\mathbf{F} = - \frac{dU}{dx}\mathbf{i =}\frac{2\alpha}{c\varepsilon\varepsilon_{0}n}\frac{dI}{dx}\mathbf{i}$$

![Shape Description automatically
generated](media/image124.png){width="1.0041666666666667in"
height="1.9993055555555554in"}

Lasers have a Gaussian beam profile, which naturally lends itself to
trapping of particles.

Trapping in three dimensions can be achieved by focussing the laser
using a microscope objective.

Trapping forces on nanoscale particles can be measured with pN
precision.
