
## 13. Micelles & Membranes {#micelles-membranes .H2}

### Further reading {#further-reading .H3}

![jonescover.gif](media/image155.png){width="1.0173611111111112in"
height="1.3354166666666667in"}A helpful explanation of self-assembly is
also covered in the book '*Soft Condensed Matter'*, although everything
required will be covered in these notes.

R.A.L. Jones

QC173.458.S62 JON

**Soft Condensed Matter**

R.A.L. Jones, Oxford University Press, 2002, Chapter 9

### ![](media/image156.png){width="3.157638888888889in" height="1.5430555555555556in"}Amphiphilic molecules {#amphiphilic-molecules .H3}

Amphiphiles are molecules which have a water soluble head group and a
hydrophobic tail group. The head group can be anionic (negatively
charged), cationic (positively charged) or uncharged. The tail group is
made up of a hydrocarbon chain.

![](media/image158.jpeg){width="1.4069444444444446in"
height="1.4069444444444446in"}![](media/image159.jpeg){width="1.2208333333333334in"
height="1.5694444444444444in"}

Amphiphiles are found in soaps, food stuffs, detergents, disinfectants
and can be found in cosmetics and pharmaceuticals. They are also a major
component of human and animal cell membranes.

When amphiphiles sit at the interface between water and oil these 2
liquids do not come into contact as much. This reduces or eliminates the
energy cost of the interface. This can be used to stabilise an interface
such as the oil-water emulsion of Mayonnaise.

Oil

Water

### ![belowCMC.jpg](media/image160.jpeg){width="1.9131944444444444in" height="1.6076388888888888in"}The critical micelle concentration {#belowcmc.jpgthe-critical-micelle-concentration .H3}

When amphiphilic molecules are added to water at low concentrations,
they will initially disperse and some will migrate to the surface to
reduce the unfavourable contact between the hydrocarbon tails and the
water. The molecules exist as monomers.

![cylindricalmicelle.tif](media/image161.png){width="2.472916666666667in"
height="1.2416666666666667in"}![sphericalmicelle.tif](media/image162.png){width="1.2125in"
height="1.19375in"}

At a concentration called the **critical micelle concentration**
aggregates (or micelles) start to form in such a way that the
hydrophobic tails become shielded from the aqueous environment.

### ![massivemicelle.tif](media/image163.png){width="1.4493055555555556in" height="1.4402777777777778in"}The size and structure of a micelle {#massivemicelle.tifthe-size-and-structure-of-a-micelle .H3}

The free energy per molecule of amphiphiles in a micelle has a minimum
at a specific aggregation number. It is easy to see why this might be
the case.

When the micelles are too big, we must introduce amphiphiles into the
core of the structure. The unfavourable interactions between the
hydrophilic head groups of the molecules in the core and the tail groups
of surrounding amphiphiles have an energy penalty associated with them.

![tinymicelle.tif](media/image164.png){width="0.7583333333333333in"
height="0.7368055555555556in"}When micelles are too small, the
headgroups of the amphiphiles at the surface are unable to pack
efficiently enough to prevent water from contacting the hydrophobic tail
groups in the core of the micelle. This unfavourable interaction also
has an energy penalty associated with it.

![micelle.tif](media/image165.png){width="1.25625in"
height="1.2319444444444445in"}As a result of these interactions, the
micelles that form in solution will tend to have a well defined size
which corresponds to the case when the amphililes are just able to pack
together to ensure a) that no additional amphiphiles are introduced into
the core of the micelle and b ) that the headgroups pack efficiently
enough to shield the hydrophobic interior from water.

### Optimum headgroup area  {#optimum-headgroup-area .H3}

There is an optimum headgroup area, a~0~, occupied by an amphiphile at
the interface. This is determined by a balance between competing
contributions to the free energy. These contributions dominate at
different head group areas.

1.  *a \< a~0~*: Electrostatic or steric repulsion between the head
    groups act to force neighbouring molecules apart.

2.  *a \> a~0~:* If the head groups are separated too much then
    hydrocarbon tails are exposed to water resulting in hydrophobic
    interactions.

### ![jonesfigurep141.jpg](media/image166.png){width="3.7041666666666666in" height="2.8270833333333334in"}The hydrocarbon volume and critical chain length {#jonesfigurep141.jpgthe-hydrocarbon-volume-and-critical-chain-length .H3}

![](media/image167.png){width="2.2631944444444443in"
height="1.479861111111111in"}In addition to the headgroup area the
amphiphile is characterised by two other parameters.

1.  The hydrocarbon volume, *v*, is defined as the volume that is
    occupied by the hydrocarbon tails of the molecules.

![criticalchainlength.jpg](media/image168.jpeg){width="0.8916666666666667in"
height="1.7680555555555555in"}

2.  The critical chain length, *l~c~* , is the length of the hydrocarbon
    chain when it is fully extended.

*\[It is important to realise that because of the definition of l~c~ as
the maximum length of the amphiphile tail then it is
**[not]{.underline}** generally true that a~0~\*l~c~ = v*\]

### Factors affecting the shape of micelles {#factors-affecting-the-shape-of-micelles .H3}

Amphiphiles are capable of forming many different shaped micelles
including spheres, cylinders and bi-layers. The fluid like nature of
these molecules means that we can determine the shape of micelles by
considering how the amphiphiles pack together.

![bilayer.tif](media/image169.png){width="2.5in"
height="1.0298611111111111in"}![cylindricalmicelle.tif](media/image170.png){width="2.752083333333333in"
height="1.3840277777777779in"}![sphericalmicelle.tif](media/image171.png){width="1.3680555555555556in"
height="1.3402777777777777in"}

To do this we just require 3 parameters:

The hydrocarbon volume, *v,* The critical chain length, *l~c~* The
optimum head group area, *a~o\ ~*

### How do these parameters determine the shape of a micelle? {#how-do-these-parameters-determine-the-shape-of-a-micelle .H3}

The critical chain length, l~c~ , determines the size and shape of a
micelle as it sets the maximum length to which an individual amphiphile
molecule can be stretched

![Rlessthanlc.jpg](media/image172.jpeg){width="2.8319444444444444in"
height="1.5444444444444445in"}Clearly the radius of any micelle that
forms has to be less than or equal to this chain length.

$$R\  \leq l_{c}$$

### Critical packing parameter {#critical-packing-parameter .H3}

The shape of a micelle depends on the critical packing parameter.
$H = \ \frac{v}{l_{c}a_{0}}$

In each case we can calculate the conditions through applying the same
steps:

1.  Calculate the number of amphiphiles in the micelle

    a.  N = surface area of micelle / a~0~

    b.  N = volume of micelle / v

2.  Eliminate N to obtain an expression for R the radius of the micelle
    in terms of v and a~0~

3.  Substitute R ≤ l~c~

4.  Rearrange to find the condition on the critical packing parameter

### ![](media/image173.png){width="3.0395833333333333in" height="1.3930555555555555in"}Spherical micelles {#spherical-micelles .H3}

The volume and surface area of a spherical micelle can be related to the
aggregation number, N, the hydrocarbon volume, v, and the optimum head
group area, a~o~

If the radius of the micelle is less than the critical chain length,
*l~c~* for spheres to form we require that

$$\ \frac{v}{l_{c}a_{0}}\  \leq \ \frac{1}{3}$$

### ![](media/image174.png){width="2.540277777777778in" height="1.7930555555555556in"}Cylinders {#cylinders .H3}

Similarly for cylindrical micelles

![](media/image175.wmf)

The 1/3 comes from the fact that the spherical micelle (above) is more
energetically favourable than the cylinder, since the cylinder has
exposed ends with hydrophobic tails. However, when H \> 1/3 it is no
longer possible to form spheres.

### ![](media/image176.png){width="2.3368055555555554in" height="1.8555555555555556in"}Bi-layers {#bi-layers .H3}

Similarly for bi-layers:

![](media/image177.wmf)

Where in a similar way the ½ originates from the fact that when H is ≤ ½
the amphiphiles will form cylinders.

### ![](media/image178.png){width="2.342361111111111in" height="1.06875in"}Summary of key concepts {#summary-of-key-concepts-5 .H3}

Amphiphilic molecules contain a hydrophobic head group and hydrophobic
tail group.

When added to water they form micelles above a critical concentration.
Their shape is determined by the volume and length of the tail and the
optimum area of the molecular headgroups.

![](media/image179.wmf)![cylindricalmicelle.tif](media/image180.png){width="1.8083333333333333in"
height="0.9041666666666667in"}![sphericalmicelle.tif](media/image181.png){width="0.8402777777777778in"
height="0.8319444444444445in"} A geometric packing parameter can be used
to identify whether spherical, cylindrical or bilayer structures will
form.

![bilayer.tif](media/image182.png){width="1.6402777777777777in"
height="0.6798611111111111in"}

![](media/image183.wmf)

![](media/image184.wmf)

### Vesicle formation  {#vesicle-formation .H3}

When lipid bi-layers are formed in solution, there is an excess energy
associated with the exposed hydrophobic tail groups at the edges of the
structure.

![](media/image185.png){width="3.8375in" height="1.0541666666666667in"}

The bi-layers can offset this energy by folding around to close
themselves off and form an isolated shell or vesicle.

vesicle

Vesicles are closed structures that can be used to encapsulate materials
in their interior for use in drug delivery. If the outside of the
vesicle is decorated with specific chemical receptors which cause the
vesicle to rupture and deliver its cargo when it reaches its target, it
can act like a 'magic bullet'.

> ![](media/image188.jpeg){width="2.339583333333333in"
> height="1.8020833333333333in"}Vesicles are also the most basic model
> for understanding the physics of the cell wall. A cell membrane
> consists of a vesicle with additional molecules such as membrane
> proteins distributed in the lipid bi-layer (A lipid is a type of
> amphiphile).

**Bi-layer / membrane elasticity**

a0

a0+Δa

r

d

Earlier we considered the optimum headgroup area a~0~ which is at the
minimum of the free energy. However, when a bi-layer is bent the
amphiphiles on the outside of the bi-layer move slightly further apart,
whilst the molecules on the inside are pushed closer together. Both
these changes will increase the free energy of the bilayer leading to a
resistive force or elasticity.

In the simplest approximation:

$$\mathrm{\Delta}U\  \approx \ \frac{1}{2}k\mathrm{\Delta}a^{2}$$

**Calculation: Estimating the elasticity of a membrane**

1.  Calculate the head group area at the middle and outside edge of the
    curved membrane:

    a.  $a_{0} = R\theta Z$

    b.  $a_{0} + \mathrm{\Delta}a$=$\left( R + \frac{d}{2} \right)\theta Z$

2.  Solve to find:

> $$\mathrm{\Delta}a = \frac{da_{0}}{2R}$$

3.  The number of headgroups per unit area is 2/a~0~. One on outer edge,
    one inner edge so the energy per unit area is 0.5kΔa^2^\*2/a~0~.
    Substituting Δa gives:

> $\frac{\mathrm{\Delta}U}{A}\  \approx \ \frac{\kappa}{2R^{2}}$ where
> $\kappa = \ \frac{kl_{c}^{2}a_{0}}{2}$

This implies that a membrane has an elasticity with spring constant κ.
It also shows that a membrane gets increasingly stiff if the constituent
amphiphiles are long and / or fat.

### Membrane (Entropic Repulsion) {#membrane-entropic-repulsion .H3}

The stiffness or bending modulus of a typical membrane is sufficiently
small that they may undergo thermal induced fluctuations. Below we
compare a membrane with some other typical "soft" materials.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
               Material                          Modulus (kPa)
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
                Rubber                               1000

                 Jelly                                10

               Membrane                               0.1
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

![membraneundulation.jpg](media/image189.jpeg){width="2.386111111111111in"
height="1.9770833333333333in"}The closer two membranes come together the
more these "thermal undulations" become restricted by the presence of
the other membrane. In comparison with the lecture on steric
interactions we may be able to guess that as the number of
configurations (or undulations) is reduced the entropy of the system
increases. Since this is unfavourable we expect a repulsive entropic
force between the membranes.

**Calculation: What is the force experienced by 2 membranes?**

To make this calculation tractable we have to make a number of
simplifications. These it turns out affect the final prefactor but give
rise to the correct physics.

We start with the following assumptions:

1.  2 bi-layers a distance D apart will interact when the modes have
    amplitude D/2

2.  From the equipartition principle each mode has k~B~T/2 energy
    associated with it.

3.  Each mode is a 2D wave and occupies an area πx^2^

Comes from geometry. Write x in terms of R and D 🡪 x^2^≈RD

> $Pressure = \ \frac{{\mathrm{\Delta}U}_{mode}}{{Vol}_{mode}} = \ \frac{k_{B}T}{\pi x^{2}D}$
> = $\frac{k_{B}T}{\pi RD^{2}}$

4.  Use earlier result to find an alternative expression for R. ΔU =
    k~B~T/2 and A = πx^2^

> $\frac{\mathrm{\Delta}U}{A} \approx \ \frac{\kappa}{2R^{2}}$ 🡪
> $\frac{1}{R} \approx \frac{{{(k}_{B}T)}^{2}}{\kappa\pi D}$

The final result is:

$$\ P = \frac{{{(k}_{B}T)}^{2}}{\kappa\pi^{2}D^{3}}$$

This pressure is always repulsive and is stronger for more flexible
membranes. The pressure also varies as 1/D^3^. This is interesting since
this is the same dependence we observed for the Van der Waals
interaction between two surfaces but with the opposite sign. The
combined pressure would therefore be:

$$P_{Tot} = \left\lbrack \frac{\left( k_{B}T \right)^{2}}{{\kappa\pi}^{2}} - \frac{A}{6\pi} \right\rbrack\frac{1}{D^{3}}$$

This has an interesting consequence that the pressure for a membrane is
either always positive or always negative regardless of distance D,
depending on the sign of the bracket. Compare this with the DLVO
potential for a charged colloid in a solution of ions which has the
electrostatic (osmotic) and VdWs terms which exhibits a maximum, meaning
that at small separations the particles become stuck together, whereas
at large separations the pressure is repulsive.

DLVO

Undulation + VdW

Electrostatic

Undulation

Dispersion
