
## 6. Water, Hydrogen Bonds & the Hydrophobic Interaction {#water-hydrogen-bonds-the-hydrophobic-interaction .H2}

In this chapter we will study two interactions that deserve special
mention in their own right. These are **hydrogen bonding** interactions
and the **hydrophobic interaction**. These are both extremely important
interactions in biology and as we will see in this and future chapters,
they are responsible for helping to maintain the structure of proteins
and other biomacromolecules as well as the structure of cell membranes.
However, before we begin to discuss these interactions it is worthwhile
considering the properties of the solvent in which these interactions
are usually most prevalent...water!

### Properties of Water {#properties-of-water .H3}

Water is arguably the most important liquid on earth. All biological
organisms have a high water content and need a relative abundance of it
to survive.

Nanoscience also exploits the dielectric properties of water to help
stabilise particles and surfaces in solution (via electrostatic
colloidal interactions which we will cover later on in this course).

Although to us, water may seem like a typical liquid, this is far from
the case. When compared to other simple low molecular weight liquids it
has high melting and boiling points. It also has a high latent heat of
vaporisation and surface energy when compared to other liquids. These
properties all point to the fact that interactions other than simple
dispersion interactions are present in water.

![polarbonds.jpg](media/image48.jpeg){width="3.517361111111111in"
height="2.129166666666667in"}These properties are due to the special
nature of the interactions between water molecules.

If we consider atoms such as oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), fluorine (F) and
chlorine (Cl) we find that they are highly electronegative (they tend to
pull electrons towards themselves).

This has the effect of making covalent bonds with these atoms quite
polar. They are therefore **permanent dipoles.**

Bonds between these atoms and hydrogen tend to have a greater polarity.
Interactions between dipoles on different molecules are called **dipolar
interactions**. When these dipoles are formed by hydrogen atoms
connected to electronegative atoms they are referred to as **hydrogen
bonds.** Hydrogen bonding is present in water and is responsible for
determining many of its properties.

Note: The presence of electronegative atoms will tend to create dipoles
on a molecule. However, if the arrangements of the bonds are such that
all the dipole moments cancel out there will be no net dipole moment on
the molecule and it will be apolar. In the diagram above HCl, NH~3~ and
CH~3~Cl have dipole moments that do not cancel out and are thus polar
molecules. However, although both BF~3~ and CCl~4~ have polar bonds in
them, the symmetry in the distribution of these bonds means that the net
dipole moment is zero and they are apolar.

**How strong are Hydrogen bonds?**

The energies associated with individual **H-bonds** are typically

10-40 kJmol^-1^ (0.1 to 0.4 eV)

Comparing this with the energies associated with other bonds we have

**Metallic and Covalent Bonds** \~ 500 kJmol^-1^ (5 eV)

**Van der Waals (dispersion forces) bonds** \~ 1 kJmol^-1^ (10 meV)

They are harder to overcome than simple dispersion interactions and are
relatively stable at room temperature. The temperature controls whether
these bonds break apart. If the temperature drops below T=0°C thermal
fluctuations struggle to overcome the strength of the bond. As the
Temperature climbs to T=100°C thermal fluctuations have an increasing
probability of overcoming the bond to enable the molecules to move
apart.

### The structure of ice {#the-structure-of-ice .H3}

The location of hydrogen bonds on molecules infers greater specificity
than simple dispersion interactions (i.e. dipoles will only interact
electrostatically with dipoles and charges on other molecules), but it
also introduces some directionality to the bonds. Dispersion forces on
the other hand act between all molecules and tend to be indiscriminate
in the directions in which they act (i.e. they have spherical symmetry).

![waterandice.jpg](media/image49.jpeg){width="3.7666666666666666in"
height="2.8930555555555557in"}The **directional nature of hydrogen bonds
in water** causes water molecules to pack into an open tetrahedral
structure when it forms ice. When water crystallises, the average number
of nearest neighbour molecules decreases from \~5 in liquid to 4 in ice
(resulting in a lower density) as the structure becomes more open.

This is unusual as crystalline solids are usually denser than the liquid
because atoms/molecules become more closely spaced in the solid state.

### The structure of water {#the-structure-of-water .H3}

![722px-Liquid_water_hydrogen_bond.png](media/image50.png){width="2.3618055555555557in"
height="1.9555555555555555in"}At low (\~ room or body) temperature, the
polar nature of the interactions between water molecules causes liquid
water to retain some of this tetrahedral structure.

The hydrogen bonds are still present, but the molecules are more mobile.
The interactions between H-bonds are dipole-dipole interactions.

### Summary of properties of H-Bonds  {#summary-of-properties-of-h-bonds .H3}

![Quadruple_Hydrogen_Bond.jpg](media/image51.jpeg){width="1.3763888888888889in"
height="1.1159722222222221in"}![Carboxylic_acid_dimers_Hbond.png](media/image52.png){width="2.504861111111111in"
height="1.1548611111111111in"}H-bonds are dipole-dipole interactions
between specific functional groups. As such they have some
directionality

They have energies of \~ 4-16 k~B~T~room~ (dispersion energies \~ 1
k~B~T~room~ )

This makes them 'sticky' and more stable than simple dispersion forces
but they can also be disrupted by thermal motion of the molecules

### Hydrogen bonding in nanoscience {#hydrogen-bonding-in-nanoscience .H3}

The above properties are highly desirable when trying to form networks
of molecules that will self-assemble into large ordered structures.
Directionality and stickiness are clearly very important for helping to
build a structure of any kind. Without stickiness, the structure would
not hold together and in the absence of directionality we would have no
control over how the molecules would stick together i.e. we would end up
with a horrible, blobby, amorphous lump of molecules. However, an
equally important property which makes hydrogen bonds particularly
useful for creating self-assembling structures is the fact that they are
relatively weak (compared to interactions such as covalent bonds). This
means that they can be occasionally broken by thermal motion of the
molecules. The thermal motion of the molecules allows bonds to break and
reform in such a way that the system find its most stable structure and
does not get trapped in other less energetically favourable states
because bonds cannot be broken again.

Molecules that form many H-bonds with neighbours have higher
dissociation energies and are thus more sticky than molecules which form
only a few of these bonds. Varying the number of H-bonds on a molecule
can therefore be used to increase or decrease the stability of the
structures that they form; Moreover, if the locations of the H-Bonds are
carefully designed into the molecules, the specificity of the
interactions between them can be increased and greater control can be
obtained over the structures that they will form.

![A picture containing diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image53.png){width="3.151388888888889in"
height="3.839583333333333in"}If the molecules are designed carefully,
the directionality of H-bonds can be used to form supramolecular
aggregates that self-assemble in solution or on a surface. A nice
example of this is the case of melamine and a molecule called PTCDI (see
figure on the right). Each PTCDI molecule is capable of forming three
specific hydrogen bonds with a melamine molecule. However, melamine can
form a total of nine of these H-bonds with PTCDI, meaning that each
melamine molecule can be connected to three PTCDI molecules. As result,
when these molecules are mixed in the presence of a flat
(noninteracting) surface, they tend to form large areas of a hexagonal
lattice, where the vertices and edges of the hexagons are made of
melamine and PTCDI molecules respectively.

### Hydrogen bonding in nature {#hydrogen-bonding-in-nature .H3}

![A picture containing arrow Description automatically
generated](media/image54.png){width="4.719444444444444in"
height="2.5027777777777778in"}Biological molecules also exploit the
directionality of H-bond formation to produce rigid, structural elements
that give these large molecules a well-defined shape. For example,
proteins use hydrogen bonds to create well-defined structural elements
such as helical structures and folded chain structures called
beta-sheets. DNA also uses the specificity of hydrogen bonding between
complimentary base pairs to produce its characteristic double helix
structure.

### Hydrophobic interactions {#hydrophobic-interactions .H3}

*The hydrophobic effect is a difficult subject as it logically fits with
two sections of this course. Here we give an explanation of the effect
but we will revisit the topic later ("Entropic forces"). If you find the
discussion of entropy initially confusing this is understandable.
However, a more detailed explanation of this aspect is included later.*

![clathratecagewithmethane.gif](media/image55.png){width="1.7840277777777778in"
height="1.757638888888889in"}When a nonpolar molecule comes into contact
with polar liquids such as water it can only interact via dispersion
forces (\~0.4 k~B~T~room~). These are much weaker than the hydrogen
bonds that water prefers to form (\~4-16 k~B~T~room~).

As a result of these less favourable interactions, water molecules will
tend to reorient themselves near non-polar molecules to form a more
ordered structure which maximises H-bonding called a Clathrate cage (see
image on right showing a methane molecule surrounded by water
molecules).

This increase in the local ordering of the molecules causes a reduction
in the entropy of the water surrounding the non-polar molecules. There
is a large entropic energy penalty (equivalent to \~10-30 kJmol^-1^ or
approx 4-12 kT at room temperature) associated with increasing the local
order (decreasing disorder) of water molecules around a nonpolar
molecule. Since this entropic penalty is proportional to the area of
contact between the nonpolar molecule and the water minimising this area
will be favourable![A picture containing icon Description automatically
generated](media/image56.png){width="2.0881944444444445in"
height="2.4930555555555554in"}. For this reason, nonpolar molecules will
have a strong tendency to cluster together in water, to reduce the total
area of the nonpolar/water interface. This is the physical origin of the
**hydrophobic effect.**

Two droplets of a nonpolar liquid in water will experience an effective
interaction due to the need to increase the entropy (decrease the order)
of surrounding water molecules. They can satisfy this criteria by
sticking together and reducing their total surface area.

**Note: The hydrophobic effect is not the result of a direct interaction
between nonpolar molecules. It occurs as a consequence of the need to
maximise the entropy of surrounding water molecules**

There is still no satisfactory theory to explain the details of the
hydrophobic interaction. This is because the interaction between two
surfaces involves many layers of intervening molecules.

Measurements show that the interaction energy, *U,* decays exponentially
with the separation between surfaces

$$U = - 2\gamma_{1}S\exp\left( - \frac{D}{\lambda_{0}} \right)$$

**w**here γ~1~ is the interfacial energy with water, S, is the
interfacial area and λ~o~ is the range of the interaction

λ~o~ \~1-2nm

### The hydrophobic force {#the-hydrophobic-force .H3}

![A picture containing application Description automatically
generated](media/image57.png){width="3.4652777777777777in"
height="1.9020833333333333in"}The hydrophobic force between two flat
surfaces with a separation D is given by

$$F = - \frac{dU}{dD} = - \frac{2\gamma_{1}S}{\lambda_{0}}\exp\left( - \frac{D}{\lambda_{0}} \right)$$

where γ~1~ is the interfacial energy with water, S, is the interfacial
area and λ~o~ is the range of the interaction. λ~o~ \~1-2 nm

### Hydrophobic interactions in nature {#hydrophobic-interactions-in-nature .H3}

![insulin folded
unfolded.bmp](media/image58.png){width="2.2840277777777778in"
height="1.7118055555555556in"}![200px-Phospholipids_aqueous_solution_structures_svg.png](media/image59.png){width="1.6402777777777777in"
height="2.0215277777777776in"}The hydrophobic interaction is also used
by protein molecules to ensure that the molecules fold up in a specific
way. Parts of the protein that are required to be in the centre of the
molecule are hydrophobic, while those that need to be on the outside of
the molecule are hydrophilic. When these molecules are placed in water,
they 'fold' up in such a way that the hydrophilic parts are in contact
with water while the hydrophobic parts cluster together in the centre of
the folded structure. When combined with the hydrogen bonded structures
mentioned above, these interactions lead to the formation of highly
specific arrangements of the different structural elements in the
protein molecules. This is important because the arrangement of
structures such as beta-sheets and alpha-helices control the biological
function of these large molecules.

As we will see later, the hydrophobic force is also important in the
formation of biological (cell) membranes and in the self-assembly of
surfactant micelles. The latter structures have numerous applications in
nanotechnology.
