## 9. Nanoscale Force Measurement Techniques -- AFM {#nanoscale-force-measurement-techniques-afm .H2}

### Forces at the Nanoscale {#forces-at-the-nanoscale .H3}

Forces between nanoscale objects typically occur in the range 1pN-1nN
and can be difficult to measure.

To measure these forces we ideally require a measurement system where
the change in applied force gives a linear response in the measurement
device (although this is not necessary).

In this chapter we will study experimental techniques that can be used
to measure nanoscale forces directly. The first of these techniques is
Atomic Force Microscopy

### Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) {#atomic-force-microscopy-afm .H3}

In the first year 'Frontiers in Physics' module, you considered how
atomic force microscopy can be used to image the surface of a sample.
There are two main imaging modes in AFM:

### ![](media/image84.png){width="2.4159722222222224in" height="1.3354166666666667in"}Contact mode {#contact-mode .H3}

A sharp tip is mounted on a cantilever and brought into contact with the
surface to be studied. As the tip is dragged along the surface, the
cantilever deflects. If we track the position of the cantilever we can
build up an image of surface as the tip moves along. The contact between
tip and sample can be quite destructive, so this mode of imaging is
usually reserved for hard samples.

### Tapping mode {#tapping-mode .H3}

![](media/image85.png){width="1.5694444444444444in"
height="1.5604166666666666in"}A tip mounted on a cantilever is
oscillated at its resonant frequency and brought close to a surface. The
tip-sample interaction causes the resonant frequency of the cantilever
to shift by an amount which depends upon the tip-sample separation and
the local gradient of the force. If we move the tip across the surface
and vary the tip-sample separation in such a way that the resonant
frequency remains constant, we can build up images of constant force
gradient. For a uniform, chemically homogeneous sample this corresponds
to an image of the topography (or height variations). We can thus build
up images of the surface structure in a similar way to that used in
contact mode. However, the advantage of this technique is that the tip
spends very little time in contact with the surface and is less
destructive. This technique is therefore more suitable for imaging soft
samples.

### Force Measurements using the AFM {#force-measurements-using-the-afm .H3}

AFM can also be used to measure forces. If an AFM tip is brought into
contact with a surface, the forces on the tip will cause the cantilever
on which it is mounted to deflect.

The AFM cantilever bends/deflects in response to an applied force. The
applied force is given by

> $$F = kz$$

The spring constant of the cantilever can be derived using the physics
of elastic beams and is given by

> $$k = \frac{3EI}{l^{3}}$$

where *E* is the Youngs Modulus of the cantilever (Pa), *l* is its
length and *I* is its geometric moment of inertia (m^4^).

### Detecting the deflection of the cantilever  {#detecting-the-deflection-of-the-cantilever .H3}

If small (pN - nN) forces are exerted on the cantilever, then the
displacements of the cantilever are likely to be small (pm - nm). Our
ability to detect small forces is controlled partly by the design of the
cantilever and partly by the instrumentation used to detect the
deflections of the cantilever.

The most common method of detecting cantilever deflections is to reflect
a laser beam off the back of the cantilever.

The laser light is collected using a position sensitive photodetector,
called a split photodiode, which produces an output current that varies
with the position of the laser beam on the detector. These detectors are
simple two photodiodes (PD) that are connected to a differential
amplifier in such a way that the output signal is proportional to the
difference in intensity detected by the two photodiodes. The diagram
below shows a laser spot falling on a split photodiode detector and a
bar graph showing the measured intensities at the two photodiodes.

Photodiode\
current

The advantage of using this type of detection system are

i)  these detectors are relatively inexpensive

ii) the linear deflection of the laser beam on the split photodiode
    depends upon geometry (i.e. the length of the cantilever and the
    cantilever-detector distance). This means that the detection system
    can be optimized to give the best response for a given force range
    by changing these lengths/distances.

### Interpreting the photodiode signal {#interpreting-the-photodiode-signal .H3}

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image94.png){width="3.1819444444444445in"
height="1.0944444444444446in"}As mentioned above, the split photodiodes
are connected to a differential current amplifier which produces a
signal that is proportional to the difference in photocurrents generated
by the two diodes

> $$i_{signal} = i_{1} - i_{2}$$

If i~signal~ \> 0 force acts upwards

If i~signal~ \< 0 force acts downwards

The detection efficiency of the photodiodes is such that cantilever
displacements as small as 0.1 nm can be routinely detected. This means
that forces in the sub nN range can easily be measured using AFM (see
problem 6.1 above).

### Calibrating the spring constant of the cantilever {#calibrating-the-spring-constant-of-the-cantilever .H3}

In practice, it is often difficult to calculate the spring constant of a
cantilever, so it has to be calibrated prior to a measurement. Reasons
for this might include the fact that the Young's Modulus or dimensions
of the cantilever are not known with sufficient precision to calculate
the spring constant.

###  {#section .H3}

### Calibration: Thermal tuning of the cantilever  {#calibration-thermal-tuning-of-the-cantilever .H3}

This method involves measuring the natural response of the cantilever in
response to thermal motion. When the cantilever is agitated by thermal
motions of the atoms around it, it starts to vibrate. Vibrations at the
resonant frequency of the cantilever occur much more easily than
vibrations at other frequencies (which are heavily damped).

If we monitor the **displacement of the cantilever *z* obtained from the
noise signal** when the cantilever is not being driven, we obtain
something like the signal shown below

z

We can calculate the **mean square displacement of the cantilever
*\<z^2^\>*** from the data shown in the plot. We then assume that the
potential energy stored in the cantilever is comparable to the thermal
energy provided by its surroundings to give

$$\frac{1}{2}k\left\langle z^{2} \right\rangle = \frac{1}{2}k_{B}T$$

Note: the factor of Â½ on the right hand side comes from equipartition
theory (more on this in Thermal Physics), but the thermal energy is
still of order k~B~T, where k~B~ is Boltzmann's constant. Rearranging
this equation gives

$$k = \frac{k_{B}T}{\left\langle z^{2} \right\rangle}$$

Hence the spring constant of the cantilever can be determined using a
knowledge of the temperature, *T*, and measurements of the mean square
displacement of the cantilever under the influence of natural thermal
vibrations.

### Force detection limits in AFM {#force-detection-limits-in-afm .H3}

Typical cantilever spring constant: 0.01-50 Nm^-1^

We can routinely measure cantilever displacements of \~ 0.1nm

We can therefore measure forces \> 10 pN with relative ease using AFM

### Force vs. distance curves {#force-vs.-distance-curves .H3}

AFM can be used to map out the strength of dispersion (and other) forces
as a function of the distance between sample and tip.

![](media/image96.png){width="1.6534722222222222in"
height="1.4020833333333333in"} ![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image97.png){width="2.880398075240595in"
height="2.1624846894138234in"}

### ![nmat1001-f7](media/image99.png){width="3.0527777777777776in" height="3.032638888888889in"}Protein (un)folding {#nmat1001-f7protein-unfolding .H3}

![proteinunfoldingvg5](media/image100.jpeg){width="3.0395833333333333in"
height="2.283333333333333in"}AFM is routinely used to map out the forces
associated with the folding and unfolding of individual protein
molecules

### Moving the AFM tip with nanoscale precision -- Piezo electric motors {#moving-the-afm-tip-with-nanoscale-precision-piezo-electric-motors .H3}

In order to build up images with an AFM one must scan the tip backwards
and forwards across a sample building up a 2D map of the force measured
at different points (see figure).

*Diagram illustrating how an AFM builds up an image of a sample*

In order to do this successfully one must be able to move the position
of the tip with sub-nanoscale precision. AFMs and other similar
technology accomplish this using motors based on the piezo-electric
effect.

Certain kinds of crystal are called piezo-electric crystals (e.g
quartz). These crystals become polarized when subjected to a stress /
strain.

\+

\+

\-

\-

\-

\+

\-

\-

\+

\+

\-

\-

\-

\+

E

Force

The diagram above shows how when a crystal containing equal numbers of
positive and negative elements is deformed by an external force it
results in the formation of a dipole. As a result of the dipole an
electric field is developed across the sample.

The same effect however can work in reverse. If an electric field is
applied across the sample this will deform the sample due to the forces
acting on +ve and -ve elements resulting in expansion or contraction
along one dimension.

\-

\+

\+

\-

\-

\-

\+

v

\-

\+

\+

\-

\-

\-

\+

Force

E

![Diagram Description automatically generated with medium
confidence](media/image103.jpeg){width="1.3597222222222223in"
height="1.148611111111111in"}This controlled expansion is usually small.
By stacking these crystals and electrodes it is possible to make very
precise motors capable of controlled motions well below a nanometre by
changing the applied voltage.

The changes in a piezo-electric crystal can be related by the following
equations.

$$P = \  - d\sigma + \alpha E$$

$$\varepsilon = \frac{\sigma}{Y} + dE$$

P is the polarization, d is the piezo-electric constant, Î± is the
polarizability of the material, E is the electric field. É is the linear
strain ie change in length / original length. Y is the young's modulus.
