
## 11. Entropic Forces {#entropic-forces .H2}

### Colloidal Stability {#colloidal-stability .H3}

In the last lecture we discussed how colloidal particles can be
stabilized against flocculation by weakly charging the surface of the
particles. However, it is sometimes not possible to use charges to keep
particles and surfaces apart in solution. This is particularly true when
using organic solvents as the suspending medium (e.g. in ferrofluids),
as ionic solids (electrolytes) are often poorly soluble in these
solvents and thus unable to stabilise the system.

![rodonsurfacenoangle.jpg](media/image133.jpeg){width="2.4277777777777776in"
height="1.2902777777777779in"}An alternative route to stabilisation is
to use Steric (or entropic) repulsion effects between surfaces. This
stabilisation method involves decorating the surface with long molecules
(e.g. polymers). The molecules are tethered to a surface by one end and
can wave around freely in solution. As a result they have a large number
of possible orientations/**configurations** (i.e. directions in which
they can point).

When a second surface comes close to the surface that is covered with
our molecules, the number of configurations that the molecules can adopt
is reduced. This reduces the **entropy** (or measure of disorder) of the
molecules. Recall from your 'Thermal physics' module that the second law
of thermodynamics states that the 'the entropy of an isolated system can
never decrease'. This means that there is a tendency for the entropy to
increase and to be maximised in an isolated system. (We will assume for
the sake of argument that the tethered molecules represent an isolated
system).

If the entropy of the tethered molecules is reduced by bringing a second
surface into close proximity, the system will tend to resist this
reduction in entropy by generating a repulsive force. This **entropic
repulsion is the physical origin of steric forces** **between
surfaces**.

### Boltzmann form of Entropy {#boltzmann-form-of-entropy .H3}

Boltzmann derived a statistical form of the entropy of a system, *S*,
such that:

$$S = k_{B}\ln w$$

where *W* is the number of available (micro) states corresponding to a
given macrostate and *k~B~* is Boltzmann's constant (JK^-1^ ).

In this case...

Macrostate → molecule tethered to the surface

Microstate → a single orientation of the molecule

### Calculation: the entropy of a tethered rod {#calculation-the-entropy-of-a-tethered-rod .H3}

Suppose we treat the molecule as a rigid rod with length, *l*, and cross
sectional area, *a*. If we allow the rod to point in any direction it
can sweep out half a sphere with a total area, A~1~

1.  Consider the free rod (ie when no upper surface is present)

    a.  Calculate the Area of the surface it can move over

    b.  Work out the number of microstates W~1~=A~1~/a

    c.  Use the Boltzmann formula to calculate the entropy S~1~

2.  Repeat the calculation for the rod with upper surface at D \< l

    a.  Calculate the Area of the surface A~2~ it can move over

        i.  ![](media/image135.png){width="2.109722222222222in"
            height="1.3909722222222223in"}Work out an elemental area in
            terms of x

        ii. Substitute for x in tems of l and cosθ

        iii. Integrate between θ~min~ and θ~max~

    b.  Work the number of microstates W~2~=A~2~/a

    c.  Use the Boltzmann formula to calculate the entropy S~2~

3.  The important quantity is the change in entropy with separation D of
    the two surfaces

    a.  ΔS = S~2~ -- S~1~

For the case considered in the lecture where θ~min~ = 0 and θ~max~ is
defined by the distance of the upper plate

$$\mathrm{\Delta}S = \ k_{B}\ln\frac{D}{l}$$

### Entropic repulsion force {#entropic-repulsion-force .H3}

![](media/image136.wmf)We can extract a force if we know how the
entropic contribution to the interaction energy , U, depends upon
separation D. As

To determine the energy change associated with our change in entropy we
must determine the change in free energy associated with bringing the
two surfaces together. The change in the Gibbs free energy, U, (see
'Thermal physics' notes) of the system at constant temperature is given
by:

> $\mathrm{\Delta}U = \ \mathrm{\Delta}H - T\mathrm{\Delta}S$

The first term, ∆H is the change in enthalpy. Essentially this
encompasses all the interactions we have met thus far in this course
such as the formation of bonds.

The second term TΔS is the change in energy due to entropy. A decrease
in entropy results in an increase in the free energy U. Therefore, if
there are no changes in ∆H this will result in a repulsive force.

$$F = \  - \frac{d\mathrm{\Delta}U}{dD} = \frac{- d\mathrm{\Delta}H}{dD} + \frac{Td\mathrm{\Delta}S}{dD}$$

### How does entropy result in a force? {#how-does-entropy-result-in-a-force .H3}

Whilst it is clear mathematically that entropy may result in a force, it
is helpful to understand this fundamental idea on a conceptual level. It
is often stated that entropy is a measure of disorder. This statement
whilst true needs clarifying. Entropy is actually a statement about the
number of possible equivalent configurations.

Consider the following analogy: a bedroom can be organised in many
different ways. Clothes could be strewn across the floor or folded on a
chair, the lamp could be in any number of different positions, the books
could be on the shelf or chucked on the floor. All of these different
arrangements would represent a single configuration or microstate.
However, there are many more ways in which a bedroom could be untidy
rather than tidy. In making this statement we are saying that the
different ways in which a room is messy are functionally equivalent. It
doesn't matter which way, we would still call it untidy. In terms of
Boltzmann's entropy formula we might say that an untidy bedroom has a
larger entropy than a tidy one. This is because the number of equivalent
configurations or microstates of an untidy room is larger than a tidy
room.

However, here is a key point. How does a tidy bedroom go from tidy to
untidy? The fact that there are more messy room configurations than tidy
ones by itself does not explain why a room might end up messy. In our
equation above the free energy depended on ΔS ( a statement about the
change in the number of configurations) but it also depends on
Temperature. The role of temperature is to allow the system to freely
explore all the different configurations. In the case of our room we
might say that temperature is analogous to a strong earthquake. The
earthquake enables all the items in a room to move around, creating (or
"sampling") different configurations. Now the role of entropy is
clearer. Since the earthquake causes the configurations to be sampled
randomly the final configuration is a matter of chance or probability.
Since there are many more messy configurations we expect that the room
will become messy if hit by an earthquake. The explanation depends both
on entropy ( a statement about probability) and temperature (a way of
sampling those different microstates).

Finally, consider the situation in which you are in a tidy room when an
earthquake hits. In order to keep the room tidy (to work against the
change in entropy) requires you to do a lot of work, to apply forces to
prevent things moving out of place. You need to apply forces to resist
the "entropic force" being generated.

In the microscopic world of colloidal particles, salt ions and nano-rods
tethered to surfaces interactions are comparable to the thermal energy
k~B~T. This means the temperature enables particles etc to sample
different microstates giving rise to significant entropic forces.

### The pressure between two surfaces {#the-pressure-between-two-surfaces .H3}

Earlier we calculated the entropic force produced by a single rod
tethered to a surface. In reality a surface will be covered with a large
number of rods with an average spacing.

In the case where the separation between tethering points is, d, then
the effective area occupied by one molecule is d^2^

![](media/image139.wmf)![graftingdensity.jpg](media/image140.jpeg){width="3.9277777777777776in"
height="1.4479166666666667in"}The force per unit area (Pressure) is P,
where

### ![confinedrod.jpg](media/image141.jpeg){width="1.8708333333333333in" height="1.1298611111111112in"}Summary of key concepts {#confinedrod.jpgsummary-of-key-concepts .H3}

When the motion of molecules near a surface is confined it reduces the
entropy of the system.

This gives rise to a repulsive force which acts to push surfaces apart
and oppose the entropy reduction

![](media/image142.wmf)For rod like molecules on a surface which occupy
an area *d^2^*, the pressure between surfaces at a separation, D, is
given by

### Depletion Forces {#depletion-forces .H3}

Real systems can often contain multiple components of different sizes,
think for example of a biological cell with many different sized
proteins or a paint where there are both small pigment particles and
large latex particles. Even in the absence of specific energetic
interactions between these components the large particles / surfaces can
experience an attractive force due to the entropy of the smaller
particles.

![](media/image143.png){width="5.9883727034120735in"
height="1.8528127734033246in"}

*The motion of a large particle is filmed as it diffuses inside a
boundary. In (b) only the large particle is inside the boundary. The
probability of finding the particle at a particular location is
indicated by the colour map. The probability is uniform across the
entire volume. In (c) lots of small particles (which are not visible)
are also added to the volume. Now the large particle spends nearly all
of its time trapped against the boundary. This indicates that there is
now a force keeping the large particle at the edge.* \[ Dinsmore et al
PRL 1998\]

### Excluded Volume {#excluded-volume .H3}

r

r

In a multi-component system, the motion of the small particles in a
suspension is restricted by the presence of the larger object (eg a
large particle or plate). In addition to the volume taken up by the
large object itself the small particle centres are also "excluded" from
a thin layer around the object related to their own size. The entire
volume (volume of the large object and the layer around it) is known as
the excluded volume.

**Key insight:** *Small particles are excluded / depleted from a volume
around any larger object in solution.*

### Depletion Force between 2 plates {#depletion-force-between-2-plates .H3}

Two large objects in a suspension of smaller particles can experience an
attractive force if they come too close together. This force arises from
the change in entropy of the [small particles]{.underline} arising from
the change in excluded volume around the [larger objects]{.underline} as
they come close together.

**Calculation: depletion force for 2 flat plates in suspension of small
spheres**

1.  Calculate the excluded volume of the plates when they are far apart
    (V~excl_1~). This is related to the geometry of the object **and**
    the geometry of the small particle (see above)

2.  Calculate the excluded volume when the objects come close enough
    together that there excluded volumes overlap (V~excl_2~).

3.  Calculate the change in excluded volume. ΔV~excl~=V~excl_2~ -
    V~excl_1~.

*Be careful with the sign of this term, it should be negative as the
objects come closer together since the overlap region between the
objects reduces the total volume.*

The change in volume accessible to the particles ΔV~p~ increases as the
excluded volume decreases. There are therefore 2 scenarios:

D \> 2r 🡪 No change in V~excl~ since no overlap

D \< 2r 🡪
$\mathrm{\Delta}V_{p} = \  - \mathrm{\Delta}V_{excl} = (2r - D)A$

This increase in the volume accessible to the small particles, means
there are more possible configurations or microstates the closer the
large plates come together.

From our previous lecture we know that S=k~B~lnW 🡪 ΔS \> 0 as the
separation between the plates, D, decreases.

Consequently:

$$F = \frac{- d\mathrm{\Delta}U}{dD} = \ \frac{Td\mathrm{\Delta}S}{dD} < 0\ $$

This implies that if the plates are separated by a distance D \< 2r
there will be an attractive force between the plates.

Calculating the number of microstates is however tricky. We showed in
lectures (*this will not be examined*) that this problem can also be
equivalently described in terms of an osmotic pressure associated with
the small colloidal particles. This lead to a key result:

$$\mathbf{\mathrm{\Delta}U = \ }\mathbf{P}_{\mathbf{osmotic}}\mathbf{\mathrm{\Delta}}\mathbf{V}_{\mathbf{excl}}$$

### Entropic Force v Osmotic Pressure {#entropic-force-v-osmotic-pressure .H3}

The Depletion force can therefore be described in 2 different but
equivalent ways:

1.  It arises due to the increasing entropy of the small spheres due to
    the increased volume as the plates move together.

2.  It is an osmotic pressure difference acting on the plates due to the
    different concentration of small particles in between and outside
    the plates.

It is perhaps easy to get confused about whether the Osmotic pressure
results in attraction or repulsion. We have seen that for 2 charged
plates the pressure is repulsive, but for 2 plates surrounded by small
spheres it is attractive. The pressure acts to reduce the differences in
concentration. Thus in the charged plates the concentration of ions is
higher between the plates. The pressure therefore draws liquid from the
bulk into the gap, pushing the plates apart and reducing the ionic
concentration there. In this lecture the concentration of particles is
high outside the gap and zero in between. The pressure therefore pulls
water from the gap into the bulk to reduce the concentration. This in
turn pulls the plates together to compensate for the loss of water in
the gap.

### Depletion Force 2 spheres {#depletion-force-2-spheres .H3}

The depletion force between 2 large spheres in a fluid of smaller
spheres can be calculated in an analogous way to the 2 plates. The
problem is the same, since we must work out the change in excluded
volume between the two spheres as they come close together. However, the
different geometry makes the calculation a little trickier.

R

D

The volume of overlap between 2 spheres is twice the volume of a
spherical cap.

R'

h

$V_{cap} = \frac{\pi}{3}h^{2}\left( 3R^{'} - h \right)$

> h = R' -- D/2 and R' = R + r

### Hydrophobic Effect revisited {#hydrophobic-effect-revisited .H3}

In section 6 it was highlighted that the hydrophobic effect was a
difficult subject since it fitted with different sections of the course.
Hydrogen bonds are permanent dipoles and hence we initially visited the
subject in section 4. However, in understanding the hydrophobic effect
we also needed to consider a principle which we have subsequently
explored, that is that Entropy can produce a force (section 11)

Now hopefully with a broader understanding of this principle we can
revisit the hydrophobic effect and show how this fits together.

![waterandice.jpg](media/image49.jpeg){width="1.125in"
height="1.9159722222222222in"}Let us consider a single water molecule
surrounded by other water molecules. The single water molecule is
composed of Oxygen and Hydrogen atoms resulting in a permanent dipole.
This permanent dipole forms because the electronegative oxygen atom
pulls the electron density in the covalent bond towards itself. This
results in a slight positive charge on the Hydrogen and slight negative
charge on the Oxygen. These charges interact with neighbouring water
molecules so that there is a "Hydrogen Bond" between the Hydrogen of one
molecule and the Oxygen of a neighbour.

The Hydrogen bonds are much more stable than dispersion interactions but
still able to be disrupted by thermal fluctuations on a reasonable
timescale. Typical Hydrogen bond energies \~ 12k~B~T when compared with
dispersion interactions \~ 2k~B~T. This means that in liquid water the
water molecules find a stable orientation for a small amount of time and
then change orientation or neighbours. Now let us think of this in terms
of the language of entropy we have been developing. Since there are lots
of orientations and lots of possible neighbours this means there are a
large number of microstates for a collection of water molecules.

![A picture containing icon Description automatically
generated](media/image56.png){width="2.0881944444444445in"
height="2.4930555555555554in"}![clathratecagewithmethane.gif](media/image55.png){width="1.7840277777777778in"
height="1.757638888888889in"}Now consider adding a single non-polar
molecule to the collection of water molecules. Water molecules cannot
form hydrogen bond interactions with this molecule and so to minimise
the number of lost hydrogen bonds the water molecules must arrange
themselves in a very specific structure -- "The clathrate cage". How
many equivalent configurations are now accessible to these water
molecules? Due to the restrictions imposed by the presence of this
non-polar molecule the water molecules cannot be arranged in lots of
different orientations and they are confined to a relatively small
number of nearest neighbours. In other words the number of microstates
is much smaller than before.

If we add a second non-polar molecule to the water this likewise results
in a load of new water molecules reducing their entropy. We should be
able to see that for each bit of surface area of each non-polar molecule
a number of water molecules have a reduced number of configurations. If
the two non-polar molecules come close enough together the number of
water molecules affected starts to reduce. So we therefore have some
water molecules whose orientations and mobility is no longer restricted
increasing their entropy. This is approximately proportional to the
accessible surface area of the two non-polar molecules.

Summarising: when the two non-polar molecules are separate:

-   large exposed surface area

-   restricts number of configurations of large number of water
    molecules

-   small number of microstates

-   small entropy

As they come together:

-   reduced exposed surface area

-   less water molecules have restricted configurations

-   slightly larger number of microstates

-   increased entropy

Earlier we derived the expression:

$$F = T\frac{dS}{dD}$$

which relates the force to the change in entropy with distance. In this
case as we reduce the distance between the non-polar molecules the
entropy of the system of water molecules surrounding them increases. If
ΔS \> 0 and ΔD \< 0 then F \< 0. Ie the change in entropy of the water
molecule results in an effective attractive force between the two
non-polar molecules.

### An additional clarification which will not be examined: {#an-additional-clarification-which-will-not-be-examined .H3}

Our picture of the clathrate cage is somewhat simplistic. It implies
that only the layer of water molecules in direct contact with the
non-polar molecule is affected and hence contributes to the change in
entropy. This is not true. A number of layers of water molecules will
have a restricted set of configurations. To understand why consider how
the second layer of water molecules interacts with the first layer.
Since the first layer cannot easily rotate, the second layer must form a
certain relative angle to be able to form hydrogen bonds. This effect
gradually reduces as one moves further and further away due to
fluctuations. This is why there is still a hydrophobic effect between
two plates which are more than two water molecules apart. As the plates
move closer together the number of molecules affected reduces (the
entropy of the entire system goes up) since the available volume and
hence number of water molecules in the gap also decreases.
