# 1. The Nanoscale World

## The Nanoscale World

The nanoscale world is very different from the macroscopic one that we inhabit. Thermal fluctuations constantly buffet and agitate molecules so that a good mental picture is one of ceaseless random motions. Bringing some order to this chaos, nanoscale forces attempt to resist these disruptive influences. 

### Microscopic and Nanoscale Forces

Interatomic, intermolecular and surface forces act between different objects and are responsible for holding (or not holding) materials such as solids, liquids and gases together. These forces often have a simple power law dependence, but they are all extremely short-range interactions that persist over distances of $0.2 nm$ to $100nm$.

### Brownian motion and what it tells us about the micro / nanoscale world

Unlike the macroscopic world, the motion of atoms, molecules and sub-micron particles is dominated by the thermal fluctuations of atoms and molecules that surround them. Each object is constantly being pummeled by atoms and molecules in their environment which are in turn being pummeled by their neighbours. This means that motion through a liquid on the nanoscale is more like trying to swim through a children’s ball pool (where the balls are constantly being fired at you from all sides using a tennis ball cannon) and less like trying to swim as one might in a swimming pool full of water.

My point here is that the constant thermal motion that occurs on the sub-micron and nanoscale makes motion very different on these length scales (and subsequently has significant consequence for the design of swimming objects on these length scales – although this will not be covered in this module). Instead of smooth fluid like motion, like that obtained in bulk liquids (where inertial effects are important), we find that the atoms, molecules and small particles diffuse around, executing a random walk such that their mean square displacement $<x^{2}>$ after a time, $t$, is given by

$$
<x^{2}> \aprox 6Dt	\tag{1.1}
$$

i.e. their displacement varies as $t \tilda 0.5$.

The constant $D$ is referred to as the diffusion coefficient ($m^2s^{-1}$) and can be related to the size of the diffusing object and the viscosity,, ($Pas$) of the surrounding medium. For a spherical object  of radius a this is given using the Stokes-Einstein equation  

$$
D=\frac{k_{B}T}{6\pi \eta a}	\tag{1.2}
$$

## The thermal energy scale

At temperatures above absolute zero the atoms can have a significant amount of thermal energy. This thermal energy causes the atoms and molecules in a substance to jiggle around constantly, bashing into one another with effect of disrupting any interactions between the atoms. **When the thermal energy associated with atoms, molecules and particles becomes comparable to the energy of interactions, the interactions will cease to be significant.**

We therefore need to determine the magnitude of the thermal energy scale and to determine how this influences forces (e.g. Gravity and Van der Waals).

Suppose we start by considering the atoms/molecules in an ideal gas whose behavior can be described using the ideal gas equation. 

$$
PV=nRT	\tag{1.3}
$$
  
This equation relates the pressure $P$ ($Nm^{-2}$) and volume $V$ (m^{3}) of a gas, to the number of moles, n, and the temperature, $T$ (Kelvin) using the molar gas constant $R$ ($Jmol{-1}K^{-1}$). It is an equation with which you should be familiar and which you may have encountered at A-level (if not in your first year).
The left-hand side of this equation has units of energy (Nm-2 x m3 = Nm)
In fact, PV is the total internal energy of the gas, which is manifested as the kinetic (or movement) energy of the molecules.
As both sides of the equation must have identical units, the right-hand side must also have dimensions of energy. If we note that the number of moles of a substance, n, is simply the number of atoms/molecules in the gas, N, divided by Avogadro’s number, NA (=6 x 1023) we can write
 		[1.4]
So the total internal energy of the gas is NkT, where k is Boltzmann’s constant (k=1.38 x 10-23 JK-1). This means that the average thermal energy associated with each of the N atoms in the gas is
  	[1.5]
In fact, things are not quite this simple as the internal energy of a gas depends upon the properties of the individual molecules (cf thermal physics module). However, this very simple result does provide the correct order of magnitude for the thermal energy scale at a given temperature T.
How big is kT?
At room temperature, T=300 K, so kT = (1.38 x 10-23)(300) = 4.14 x 10-21 J (or 25 meV). 
For two Neon atoms at a separation of 0.2 nm, their Van der Waals energy of interaction Udispersion is given by
  (or 38 meV)
These two energies are very similar therefore we expect that the Van der Waals interactions between individual atoms and molecules would be disrupted by their constant thermal jiggling on length scales larger than a fraction of a nanometre. This turns out to be the case, confirming that the thermal energy scale is important on the nanoscale
The Boltzmann Equation
The Boltzmann equation enables us to compare the importance of the thermal fluctuations with energy (kBT) to the strength of a particular interaction or potential. This gives probability that thermal energy disrupts an interaction of strength U. N.B it is only proportional to not equal to
P(x)" ∝"  〖exp〗^(-U/k_B T)	[1.6]
In the lectures we thought about some particles suspended in a liquid. Depending on their size they either sedimented or stayed suspended in the liquid. We can use the Boltzmann probability to understand this. That is that for small enough particles, gravity is of negligible importance. The gravitational potential of a particle is given by mgz where z is the height mg is the effective weight (ie weight of particle minus the upthrust of the liquid). We can therefore rewrite the Boltzmann probability in terms of the concentration of particles at different heights.
φ(z)=φ_0 e^((-mgz)/(k_B T))=φ_0 e^((-4πR^3 ρgz)/(3k_B T))=φ_0 e^((-z)/l_g )	[1.7]
φ is the volume fraction of particles, that is the number of particles multiplied by the volume of a particle divided by the volume of the containing liquid. If gravity is insignificant then the concentration of particles should change on a lengthscale (lg) much larger than the height of the container. 
l_g=(3k_B T)/(4πR^3 ρg)	[1.8]


As we showed at particle radii ≤ 1µm particles are dominated by thermal motions and gravity becomes unimportant. This is fundamental to understanding the nanoscale world. Our macroscopic experience of gravity gives meaning to concepts like up and down. Inertia and momentum, so crucial to Newton’s laws, are likewise no longer important concepts at the nanoscale. We therefore have to do some rethinking…
